---
layout: post
title:  "Data Structures for Bootcamp Grads: The Stack ADT"
date:   2017-02-15 08:58:00 +0000
categories: cs data-structures
author: Michael Lennox (https://github.com/michaellennox)
contributors:
---

## What is a Stack

A `Stack` is an ADT that is a collection of nodes of which you access the head. It exposes two methods `#push` and `#pop` which modify the stack by either adding an element as the new head or by removing the current head.

A `Stack` can be considered as a 'pile' of items. When you add an item to the stack it goes on top of the pile, when you remove an item from the stack it comes off the top of the pile. A `Stack` is said to be LIFO (last-in first-out), ie. the last element added to a stack is the next one that is removed from the stack.

##  Example Implementation

### With a singly-linked list

The `Stack` is a class which keeps track of the most recently added item (it's `head`). Each item added to the stack becomes part of a singly-linked list and each item removed from the stack removes the head of that linked list.

A `Node` is a `Struct` representing an item in the linked list.

~~~ ruby
Node = Struct.new(:value, :next)

class Stack
  def initialize
    @head = nil
  end

  def inspect
    values = []

    until curr_node.nil?
      values << curr_node.value
      curr_node = curr_node.next
    end

    values
  end
end
~~~

To add items to the `Stack` we implement `#push`.

This method creates a new `Node` linked to the previous `@head` with the value passed and then sets this node as the current head.

~~~ ruby
class Stack
  # ... #
  def push(item)
    node = Node.new(item, @head)

    @head = node
  end
  # ... #
end
~~~

To remove items from the `Stack` we implement `#pop`.

This methods removes and returns the value of the current `@head` and sets the `@head` to equal the next node.

~~~ ruby
class Stack
  # ... #
  def pop
    current_value = @head.value
    @head = @head.next

    return current_value
  end
  # ... #
end
~~~

Manipulating the stack with `#pop` and `#push`.

~~~ ruby
stack = Stack.new
#=> []

stack.push('cat')
stack
#=> ["cat"]

stack.push(59188323)
stack
#=> [59188323, "cat"]

stack.pop
#=> 59188323
stack
#=> ["cat"]
~~~

A `Stack` will often also implement other methods such as `#peek` (returns the value of `@head` but does not remove the node) and `#is_empty?` (returns true/false depending on if the stack is empty).
