---
layout: post
title:  "Data Structures for Bootcamp Grads: The Queue ADT"
date:   2017-02-20 11:34:00 +0000
categories: cs data-structures
author: Michael Lennox (https://github.com/michaellennox)
contributors:
---

## What is a Queue

A `Queue` is an ADT that is a list of nodes of which you access both ends. One end is utilised for adding items to the queue, the other for removing items from the queue. It exposes two methods `#enqueue` and `#dequeue` which modify the queue by either adding an item to the 'back' of the queue or removing it from the 'front'.

Unlike a `Stack` a `Queue` returns items in the same order that they were inserted (FIFO => first-in first-out).

##  Example Implementation

### With a singly-linked list

The `QueueADT` is a class which keeps track of both the `head` and `tail` of the linked list. Each item added to the queue joins the `tail` of the list and each item removed comes from the head of the `list`.

(Note: `Queue` is a class in the ruby stdlib used for synchronising communication between threads, so we use `QueueADT` as the class name in these examples)

A `Node` is a `Struct` representing an item in the linked list.

~~~ ruby
Node = Struct.new(:value, :next)

class QueueADT
  def initialize
    @head = nil
    @tail = nil
  end

  def inspect
    values = []
    curr_node = @head

    until curr_node.nil?
      values << curr_node.value
      curr_node = curr_node.next
    end

    values
  end
end
~~~

To add items to the `QueueADT` we implement `#enqueue`.

This method creates a new `Node` with the value passed which is linked to by the previous `tail` and then sets this node as the current tail. When the head is nil (ie. the queue is empty) it also sets this new node as the head.

~~~ ruby
class QueueADT
  # ... #
  def enqueue(item)
    node = Node.new(item, nil)
    @tail.next = node unless @tail.nil?

    @tail = node
    @head = @tail if @head.nil?
  end
  # ... #
end
~~~

To remove items from the `QueueADT` we implement `#dequeue`.

This methods removes and returns the value of the current `head` and sets the `head` to equal the next node. If there is no next node (ie. all items in the queue have been removed) it also removes the `tail` reference.

~~~ ruby
class QueueADT
  # ... #
  def dequeue
    current_value = @head.value

    @head = @head.next
    @tail = nil if @head.nil?

    return current_value
  end
  # ... #
end
~~~

Manipulating the queue with `#enqueue` and `#dequeue`.

~~~ ruby
queue = QueueADT.new
#=> []

queue.enqueue(5)
queue
#=> [5]

queue.enqueue(10)
queue
#=> [5, 10]

queue.dequeue
#=> 5
queue
#=> [10]
~~~
